DISCOURSE PROCESSES 1,14-35 (1978)

A Code in the Node: The Use of a
Story Schema in Retrieval*

JEAN M. MANDLER
University of California, San Diego (La Jolla)

*This work was supported in part by NIMH Grants MH-24492 and MH-15828. It is
based on research reported at the Society for Research in Child Development meetings,
1977. Requests for reprints should be sent to Jean M. Mandler, Department of Psychology,
C-009, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, California 92093.


Some characteristics of story schemata and their role in encoding and retrieval
of stories are briefly described. Story schemata are described in terms of the
story grammar outlined in Mandler and Johnson (1977). Using the rules of the
grammar, canonical two-episode stories were generated as well as versions
whose surface structure violated the posited underlying structure by inter-
leaving the events of the two episodes. Predictions were made concerning the
quantity, quality, and temporal sequencing of recall for the standard and inter-
leaved versions. Recall by second-, fourth-, sixth-grade, and adult subjects was
studied. Quantity of recall was less for the interleaved stories but more marked
differences were found in the quality of recall; many more distortions and
repetitions occurred in recall of interleaved stories. The most pronounced ef-
fects were found in sequencing of recall. Subjects hearing interleaved stories
showed a strong tendency to recall stories in their canonical form rather
than in the correct input order. This tendency was more pronounced for
children. It was suggested that children are more dependent on familiar sche-
mata for retrieval than are adults.
A major advance in our understanding of discourse processes has come from
the recent attempts to characterize the structure of various kinds of prose. Much
of this work has concentrated on the structure of stories (e.g., Kintsch, 1977;
Mandler & Johnson, 1977; Rumelhart, 1975; Thorndyke, 1977). Each of these
attempts has shown that stories have suprasentential structure, that subjects are
sensitive to such structure, and use it to guide both comprehension and recall.
For example, Thorndyke (1977) and Kintsch (1977) have shown that stories
presented in scrambled order are less well recalled than those presented in normal
order. Rumelhart (1977) has shown that rules governing the formation of sum-
maries of stories may be derived from rules describing the underlying structure
of stories. The present study explores in more detail some of the ways in which
subjects use their knowledge of story structure to guide retrieval.
Many of the attempts to describe the structure of stories have been cast in the
form of grammars, consisting of sets of rewrite rules capable in principle of gen-
erating well-formed stories or of breaking down a well-formed story into its
constituent units. Mandler and Johnson (1977), following work by Rumelhart
(1975) and earlier work by Propp (1968)and Colby (1973), characterized the
underlying structure of simple stories as a set of basic nodes in a tree structure,
each of which is either causally or temporally connected to other nodes in the
tree. The rules governing the sequencing and connection of nodes were found to
be adequate to parse a fairly large set of stories, including both single and multi-
episode stories of several types.
Once a structural description of stories has been decided upon, there remains
the yet more difficult task of specifying how people use such structure in en-
coding and retrieving the information in a story. Mandler and Johnson (1977)
assumed that the structure of a story influences comprehension and recall because
of the operation of story schemata. That is, the set of grammatical rules which
specify whether or not a story is well formed is intended to represent expecta-
tions which a listener has incorporated in the form of a cognitive schema. Story
schemata are acquired through experience with listening to stories as well as
experience with typical kinds of causal and temporal event sequences in the
world. Thus, story schemata consist of sets of expectations about stories, about
the units of which they are composed, the way in which those units are sequenced,
and the types of connections between units that are likely to occur.


THE USE OF STORY SCHEMATA DURING ENCODING

The cognitive schemata reflected by the grammar serve several functions
during encoding. They provide a limited set of frameworks within which incom-
ing material will be structured. They help the listener to know which aspects of
the material are apt to be important or relevant. They also tell the listener when
some part of the story is complete and can be stored or that some proposition
must be kept in working memory because related material is yet to come.
Although some schema must be activated at the time of encoding if the ma-
terial is to be comprehended, the selection process is guided by the details of the
actual input. "Once upon a time" or some other aspect of the Setting of a story,
for example, alerts listeners to expect a sequence of statements different from
those they would hear if listening to a news report, a recipe, or a multiple-choice
test. However, people have heard many different kinds of stories and can draw
upon a variety of schemata to fit them. It is perfectly possible for subjects to
"change their minds" as a story proceeds, to decide that they have gotten off on
the wrong track, and to revise their notions of what the story is about. Reorgani-
zation can occur even after a story is finished (Spiro, 1977).
Mandler and Johnson (1977) described an explicit set of rules governing the
structure of episodes in various kinds of stories, indicating which categories or
nodes must be present and in what order. We were less explicit as to how a
listener knows when one node is complete and the next begun. That is, we relied
on an intuitive understanding of the characteristics of basic story categories.
Although precise definitions remain to be formulated, it will be helpful to the
following discussion to give an informal description of the basic nodes in an
episode and some of their characteristics which people use to decide when a
particular node has been completed and a new one begun.
The first basic node in a story is a Setting, usually consisting of stative in-
formation about one or more characters, and often including information about
the time and locale of the story. The Setting is often signaled by the use of
formalisms, such as "Once upon a time..." The Setting is followed by one or
more episodes, but only a single episode story will be considered here. The first
basic node in the episode is a Beginning, which may be any sort of event. The
clue to the listener that the Setting is complete and the Beginning node has been
entered is usually a shift from a state description to an event description; the
transition is often signaled by a formalism such as "Now, one day . . . , " which
indiates a shift to the time frame of the events in the first episode.
The listener exits from the Beginning and enters the next node, the Develop-
ment, when there is a shift to a Reaction of a character. The shift is from an
external to an internal event, at least implicitly connected by a causal relation;
i.e., the event just described causes a character to Teact. By definition the re-
acting character becomes the protagonist of the episode. Thus, the Reaction
node is central to the formation of an episode.1 Typically, the Reaction node
consists of two parts: a Simple Reaction, specifying the emotional response or
what the protagonist thinks about the Beginning event, and a Goal, in which
the protagonist formulates a plan to deal with any problem the Beginning may
have created.
At this point the listener is set to hear about a Goal Path, necessary to com-
plete the Development.2 A Goal Path consists of an Attempt to reach the Goal
and the Outcome of that attempt. The Attempt node must involve the protagonist
in an effort to achieve the explicitly stated or implied goal and consists of a series
of actions by the protagonist. The Outcome node is entered by some statement
indicating whether the Attempt resulted in success or failure. Goal Paths are re-
cursive, and if the Outcome was not successful, the listener should be prepared
for either another Goal Path, or an Outcome-embedded episode (which will not
be discussed here), or for the Ending node.
The Ending is difficult to describe informally because there are several op-
tions. In general, it consists of some further consequences, less directly connected
to the Attempt than the Outcome. Frequently the Ending has the emphatic
character of a resolution to a series of events. It often refers back to one or more
previous nodes in the episode, and may also include a reaction on the part of

1 Some of the ambiguities in understanding that arise when the Reaction node is omitted
are discussed in Mandler and Johnson (1977).
2 It is possible for an episode to consist of a Simple Reaction followed by an Action in-
stead of a Goal Path, but this alternative schema seems to be relatively uncommon.

another character. If the story contains more than one causally connected epi-
sode, the reaction of another character may signal the creation of a new pro-
tagonist, and thus the Ending of one episode may commence a new episode.
We assume that a set of general rules of this sort enables a listener to structure
incoming propositions while listening to a story. In some cases there are no
choicepoints, as in the case of an Outcome following an Attempt. In others,
particularly nodes at which new causally connected episodes may begin, there
are several alternate routes which may be followed and the listener must keep
previous nodes in mind until one or more subsequent nodes have occurred in
order to organize all of the information into an appropriate structure. There are
obviously a number of places even in a well-structured story where the listener
may go wrong. If any nodes are omitted or are displaced from the ideal order,
the chances of confusion or of encoding the information in terms of an unstable
novel structure increase.


THE USE OF A STORY SCHEMA DURING RETRIEVAL

At the time of retrieval, subjects have at their disposal a set of ordered cate-
gories, whose approximate form is known independently of the details of the
content. The schema serves as a code which operates in three ways during re-
trieval. First, it tells the subject what general sort of information is to be re-
trieved; that is, it points to a general area of memory. Second, it provides a
temporal sequence to find specific content, telling subjects which address to
move to next. Third, if the exact content of a category in the sequence cannot
be retrieved, the schema allows the subject to generate an approximation, based
on the structure of the schema itself, before moving on to the next address.
The operation of a story schema should produce specifiable characteristics of
recall. For example, it accounts for certain kinds of additions and distortions.
When the exact content of a node is not retrievable, the schema indicates that
something is missing and provides a guide to the structural characteristics of the
material to be substituted at that point. Similarly, the schema directs a particular
output order of events. In the normal situation, the input and output order will
be identical, but if the story has been presented in an irregular fashion, the out-
put should be more likely to maintain the ideal order rather than the order
actually heard.
The two main questions in the present report are how the activation of a
story schema influences recall, and whether there are developmental differences
in the use of a story schema as a retrieval mechanism. The first question was
addressed by comparing recall of two types of story, one well-structured and the
other deliberately violating the sequence of events prescribed by the grammar.
Three influences of story structure on recall were assessed. (1) Quantity of recall:
how much of a story is retrieved. (2) Quality of recall: how accurately the re-
called units are expressed and the types of distortions and additions of new
material which occur. (3) Temporal sequence of recall: whether output of a
story conforms to the input order, or whether it reflects the sequential order
dictated by the ideal schema. Each of these questions is of interest not only for
purposes of precise prediction about memory but because of the light the answers
may cast on the structure of the schemata themselves. The tree structure formed
by the rewrite rules of the grammar implies units of varying size, some of which
may be more tightly connected than others. Accuracy and sequencing of recall
should provide further information about the details of this structure.
Recall of ideally constructed two-episode stories, in which one episode fol-
lowed the other, was compared with recall of interleaved versions of the same
stories. In the interleaved versions each episode contained all the basic nodes in
the correct order but the two episodes were mixed together rather than oc-
curring successively. Each interleaved story began with a Setting node, followed
by the Beginning of the first episode, followed in turn by the Beginning of the
second episode. Next came the Reaction of the first episode, followed by the
Reaction of the second, and so forth. Such interleaved stories sound slightly
strange, since we are accustomed to the more traditional separated—episode
versions of stories. Nevertheless the interleaved stories are comprehensible and
even have an unusually symmetrical structure which one might think would
make them memorable.
The interleaved stories are simple enough that listeners should be able to un-
cover their underlying structure. However, more processing will be required to
do so than for standard stories. The advantage of connected discourse for mem-
ory is the very fact of connectedness. "Connectedness" implies the creation of
larger units than individual words or sentences. We assume that these connections
are formed in a working memory system of limited capacity in which material is
temporarily stored until decisions are made about what goes with what. When
such assignments have been made, the material can be relegated to long-term
storage while the next set of statements is being processed.
When the incoming material fits a schema, this assignment is fairly easy, since
each statement is related to the immediately preceding and following ones. The
schema specifies when an episode has been concluded and can be transferred
from working memory. In interleaved versions of stories twice as much material
must be maintained in working memory before propositions can be assigned to
their appropriate units. The extra load on working memory suggests that quantity,
quality, and sequencing of recall should all be disrupted.

Quantity of Recall

Quantity of recall should depend on the extent to which each proposition is
integrated with other propositions in the story. It is presumably easier to inte-
grate the basic nodes of an episode if they are input contiguously. For example,
for a listener to determine who is the protagonist of an episode, a Reaction must
be related to a Beginning. If these two nodes are not input contiguously, the
listener must maintain the Beginning until the appropriate Reaction occurs in
order to assign the various propositions to their relevant units. The farther apart
the two nodes, the more likely the first will be forgotten or the wrong connec-
tion made.

Quality of Recall

"Quality" can be measured not only in terms of accuracy of reproduction of
recalled nodes but also in terms of additions of new material and repetitions of
old material. Some forgetting occurs even in well-formed stories and subjects at-
tempt to replace nodes with new material (Mandler & Johnson, 1977). Since
more nodes are expected to be missing in recall of interleaved stories, more
additions should be expected. Furthermore, since the ideal schema is pointing to
the wrong location for every other node in the input sequence, there should be
more importations of material from the other interleaved episode. Repetitions,
or backtracking, should occur as the subject tries to follow a sequential order
which does not match the ideal order of the schema.

Temporal Sequence of Recall

Mandler and Johnson found that recall of well-structured stories almost al-
ways respected the input order. In a well-structured story, of course, structural
order is identical to input order, so input—output correspondence cannot be
assessed independently from structural order-output order correspondence.
Thorndyke (1977) found that displacing certain nodes at input resulted in a
tendency to recall them in the ideal order. Restle (1975) found more errors in
answering questions about temporal sequences in a story that interleaved events
involving two protagonists, when the questions required a comparison between
two "threads" (episodes, in our terminology) than within a single thread. These
findings suggest that the serial order in which propositions are input will have
less influence on output order than will the ideal structural order of the schema
used to encode the input. The technique of interleaving episodes should provide
a systematic test of the extent to which subjects use an input order strategy or a
schema-based strategy to retrieve the material.


DEVELOPMENTAL DIFFERENCES IN THE USE OF STORY SCHEMATA

The second main question of this study concerns developmental differences
in the use of story schemata. To address this question, recall of standard and
interleaved stories by children in the second, fourth, and sixth grades was studied
as well as that of adults. Mandler and Johnson (1977) found that there were
quantitative differences but few qualitative differences in recall of well-formed
stories by children and adults. The data indicated that, at least by the first grade,
children have acquired story schemata and use them to organize their recall. The
question of interest here is how children retrieve stories presented in unfamiliar
format.
In traditional memory tasks, children recall less than adults and also show
fewer signs that they use the organization of the presented materials to order
their output during recall. For example, in studies of recall of lists of categorized
words presented in random order, adults reorganize the randomly presented in-
put and cluster their output into familiar categories. Children do not accomplish
such reorganization when the structure of the materials is not obvious to them at
the time of presentation. When helped to discover the structure of the lists
through techniques such as blocking or sorting (Cole, Frankel, & Sharp, 1971;
Worden, 1974), clustering of recall becomes more similar to that of adults, al-
though quantitative differences in output remain.
We assume that the structure of stories is both more familiar and more ob-
vious to children than the structure of lists of words. Data from Mandler and
Johnson (1977) and Stein and Glenn (1978) have shown that young children are
sensitive to the structure of stories and use that structure to order their recall,
without specific instructions or assistance from the experimenter. Brown and
Murphy (1975) showed that children as young as four years were better at re-
calling a series of pictures depicting narrative or logical sequences than random
or scrambled ones. They were also better at maintaining the correct ordering in
recall of the narrative and logical sequences. Of most interest for present pur-
poses was their finding that given a scrambled series of pictures which violated
an expected or logical order of events, a sizable proportion of errors in output
sequencing stemmed from the children's producing the narrative or logical order
rather than the actually presented order.
These data are in accord with the hypothesis offered by Mandler and Robinson
(1978) that children's retrieval processes are more dependent on familiar
schemata than those of adults. This hypothesis has two implications, one in-
volving quantity of recall, the other temporal sequencing of output. The first is
that memory for material conforming to familiar, as opposed to unfamiliar
structures will be relatively better for children than for adults (Mandler & Day,
1975; Mandler & Robinson, 1978). The second is that children should be less
able to maintain an unfamiliar serial order during output but should retrieve
material according to the structures that are more familiar to them.
In the case of stories presented either in standard or in interleaved format, we
assume that both children and adults will recognize that the stories have narra-
tive structure and will use that structure to comprehend and retrieve the material.
We would expect children to be more disrupted by the unfamiliar format and so
to show quantitatively poorer recall of the interleaved stories. In terms of se-
quencing of output, we assume that adults will be able to produce interleaved
stories in interleaved fashion more readily than will children. This hypothesis
leads to the perhaps counterintuitive prediction that children's recall of scrambled
stories will be clustered into separate episodes more than will adults'.


METHOD

Subjects

Ninety-six subjects participated in the experiment, 24 from each of four age
groups: second grade, mean age 7;7, fourth grade, mean age 9;7, sixth grade,
mean age 11;4, and college students, mean age 19;6. The children were from a
predominantly middle class public elementary school in San Diego, and the col-
lege students were from the University of California, San Diego.

Materials

Four simple two-episode stories were constructed according to the story
grammar outlined in Mandler and Johnson (1977). Each story had a common
Setting, followed by two Then-connected episodes. This structure is a loose one,
in which the protagonist and events of the second episode bear only a temporal
relation to the first. However, in all stories the events made a sensible whole,
united by the common Setting in which protagonists from both episodes were
introduced.
Each standard story was then rearranged to create an interleaved version. In
these versions, following the Setting, the five basic nodes of each episode were
presented in interleaved fashion: two Beginnings (Beginning 1, followed by
Beginning 2), two Reactions, two Attempts, two Outcomes, and two Endings.
In these sets of paired nodes, the node from Episode 1 was always presented first.
Examples of a standard and interleaved story and their division into the basic
nodes are shown in Table 1. The propositions in both are identical except for
occasional substitution of proper nouns for pronouns in the interleaved versions
to provide unambiguous referents. An abbreviated representation of their com-
mon underlying structure is shown in Fig. 1. The figure does not include the
connections between nodes and also omits the subdivision of the Reaction node
into Simple Reactions and Goals (see Mandler & Johnson, 1977, for a more
detailed representation of the underlying structure).
Each basic node consisted of one or two propositions. Number of propositions
was balanced across episodes, so that each story had an equal number of proposi-
tions for each type of node. For the Reaction node, half of the episodes had
both a Simple Reaction proposition and a Goal proposition; the other half had
either a Simple Reaction or a Goal.

Design and Procedure

The design was a 2 X 4 between-subjects matrix, varying story type and age.
In each of the four age groups, 12 subjects listened to four normal stories and 12
listened to four interleaved stories. Subjects were tested individually. They were
told we were interested in how people remember stories, and then listened to
four stories presented successively on a tape recorder. Order of presentation was
TABLE 1
FIG. 1 
counterbalanced across subjects. Twenty-four hours later, subjects were asked to
recall everything they could remember from the stories. Order of recall of stories
was the same as order of presentation; recall was cued by providing the title of
each story.

Scoring Procedures

The tape-recorded protocols were transcribed and then divided into proposi-
tions. Two criteria of recall of propositions were used. The first was a strict
criterion (Category 1), in which two raters agreed that the essential meaning of a
proposition had been reproduced. The second was a loose criterion and included
two additional categories. Category 2 consisted of propositions which distorted
the meaning of a proposition or which expressed only a subsidiary part such as a
temporal clause, leaving out the main event being described. Propositions about
which the raters disagreed as to whether the meaning had been adequately ex-
pressed were also included in this category. Category 3 consisted of structural
additions, i.e., propositions which filled the structural requirements of a node
but consisted of unrelated or wrong material.
Additions, i.e., material which had not been included in the original stories
were divided into two classes: reasonable additions and distortions. Reasonable
additions included three types: (1) Redundancies, i.e., saying the same thing
twice, often in a slightly different way. Redundancies appeared sometimes to be
a kind of delaying action, the subject repeating something before retrieving the
next proposition, and sometimes to insure that the experimenter understood
what the subject meant. (2) Reasonable presuppositions, in which obviously
inferable material was added to the original proposition. For example, in the
Unlucky Day story (see Table 1), the Attempt might include the phrase "She
retraced her steps" before continuing with the original proposition. (3) Exag-
gerations, in which a statement was intensified in some way. For example, a
storm which blew down some houses in one story was occasionally referred to as
a terrible hurricane or a tornado. Although an attempt was made to separate
these three kinds of reasonable additions, it was not always possible. A storm
which blows down houses is apt to be a hurricane or a tornado and thus might
be classed as a reasonable presupposition rather than an exaggeration. For
statistical analyses the three types of reasonable additions were grouped into a
single category.
Distortions included four types: (I) Repetitions of previously recalled nodes,
in which other nodes were produced before the repetition. (2) Character and
event confusions. These distortions consisted of importations from one episode
into another, or from one node to another within the same episode. Typical ex-
amples of character confusion were a single character being used as the protag-
onist for both episodes or a character from one episode appearing in the other.
In the Unlucky Day story, for example, Tom might help his sister find her
money. An example of an event confusion would be Tom losing some money in-
stead of or in addition to breaking his leg. (3) Irrelevant or wrong material added
to a correctly recalled node. This type of addition was in marked contrast to
reasonable presuppositions; although frequently related to the story line, it
could not be assumed to be the case. For example, the subject might say "Tom
broke his arm and had to go to the hospital," before continuing with the rest of
the episode. (4) Structural additions. This category consisted of irrelevant or
wrong material which was substituted for an entire node. For example, in the
Unlucky Day story it might be recalled that the girl found her dollar. Not being
able to retrieve the Ending, the subject might say, "She felt glad and went home."
As in the case of reasonable additions, there was some overlap among these
categories and they were grouped into a single class for statistical analysis. For
example, a structural addition might contain material from the other episode
and thus represent a character or event confusion as well. In addition, there was
partial overlap between the scoring of distortions and the loose criterion for
propositions recalled. The loose criterion included all the structural additions
and also included propositions in which major character or event distortions
occurred. The general class of additions, on the other hand, included many rela-
tively minor distortions. For example, the subject could correctly recall a propo-
sition and yet add new or distorted material to it. In this case, a subject would
be credited with correct recall and at the same time be scored as having made an
addition.


RESULTS

Quantity of Recall

The same number of stories was recalled in both the standard and interleaved
story conditions (in each case, 170 out of 192, or 89%). However, of the stories
recalled, more entire episodes were omitted in the standard story condition (14%)
than in the interleaved story condition (4%). The Then-connection between two
episodes is a loose one (cf. Mandler & Johnson, 1977), and in the standard story
condition the story is "complete" when one episode has been retrieved. In an
interleaved story the material from both episodes is continuously interwoven
during input, and this fact was apparently sufficient to increase the likelihood
that something from both episodes would be recalled. In order to compare the
effects of interleaved versus standard story structure on patterns of recall, there-
fore, the main analyses were carried out on the mean number of nodes recalled
per episode, given that the episode was recalled at all.
A 2 X 4 analysis of variance, using the strict criterion, compared recall of
nodes in the two story conditions and the four age groups. Amount recalled in-
creased with age, from 3.0 nodes per episode in the second grade to 3.8 nodes
for adults, F(3,88) = 8.26, p < .001. More nodes per episode were recalled from
the standard stories (3.5) than from the interleaved ones (3.2), F ( l , 88) = 5.07,
p < .05. The interaction between age and condition did not reach significance,
^(3,88) = 2.07, p = .ll. However, since it had been predicted that children
would have relatively more difficulty in recalling interleaved stories than adults,
individual comparisons were carried out between successive age groups for the
two types of story. For interleaved stories, there was no significant change in
amount recalled from the second to the sixth grade, but significant improvement
from sixth grade to adult, F ( l , 88) = 5.90, p < .05. For standard stories there
was significant improvement in recall from the second to fourth grade, F ( l , 88) =
4.72, p<.05, and no significant change thereafter. This pattern of results, il-
lustrated in Fig. 2, is very similar to that found for recognition of familiar and
unfamiliar pictures in two previous studies (Mandler & Day, 1975; Mandler &
Robinson, 1978). The most descriptive characterization of Fig. 2 is that the
second-graders recalled relatively little of either type of story, the adults showed
equally good recall of both types, and the fourth- and sixth-graders were also
good at recalling standard stories but had more trouble in recalling interleaved
stories.
When the same analysis was carried out using the loose criterion of recall,
which included distorted and incompletely recalled nodes as well as nodes in
FIG. 2 
which new material was substituted (Categories 2 and 3 of the recall criteria),
the age trend remained, F(3,88)= 9.44, p< .01, but the difference between
standard stories (3.7 nodes per episode) and interleaved stories (3.5 nodes) was
no longer significant, F(\, 88) = 2.12. Another way of expressing this result is to
consider separately the number of nodes per episode which fell into Categories 2
and 3. This analysis showed .81 distorted nodes per episode for the interleaved
stories and .57 distortions for the standard stories, F{\, 88) = 5.03, p < .05. This
combination of findings shows how difficult it is to separate entirely quantity
from quality of recall of complex material. Subjects listening to interleaved
stories produced approximately as many nodes per episode as subjects listening
to standard stories; however, more of the nodes were distorted or confabulated.
It seems clear that in both conditions subjects were sensitive to the general
episodic structure of the material and frequently attempted to produce something
for nodes whose exact content could not be located in memory.
An analysis was also carried out on the types of node recalled. This analysis
included the Setting nodes, which since they occurred only once per story, were
scored on the basis of number of stories recalled, rather than number of episodes.
Given that they recalled an episode, subjects in the standard story condition re-
trieved 72% of the nodes in comparison to 67% in the interleaved story condition,
F(l, 88) = 4.51, p < .05. There were major differences in recall of the various
types of node, F(5,440) = 91.20, p < .001. Newman-Keuls tests showed that Re-
actions and Endings were significantly less well recalled than the other nodes
FIG. 3
(p < .001 in both cases), which did not differ significantly from each other. The
interaction between story type and type of node recalled was not significant, in-
dicating that the loss of recall in the interleaved story condition was relatively
uniform across nodes.
Percentage of nodes recalled increased from 60% in the second grade to 79%
for adults, F(3,88) = 11.15,p < .001. The overall pattern of recall of the differ-
ent types of node and the developmental trends in recall are strikingly similar
to those found by Mandler and Johnson (1977), although in the present experi-
ment the age X type of node interaction did not reach significance, F( 15,440) =
1.49, p = .10. The age differences in recall of the various types of nodes are shown
in Fig. 3, in conjunction with the previous data from Mandler and Johnson.^ A
remarkable degree of consistency between the two studies appears, in spite of
quite different sets of stories being used.
A separate analysis was carried out on the recall of the Reaction node in
order to assess recall of its two subtypes: Simple Reactions and Goals. Goals are
more central to the overall meaning of an episode, and not surprisingly proposi-
tions representing Goals were better recalled (32%) than propositions represent-

3 The data from the previous study were expressed in terms of mean number of proposi-
tions recalled per node. In Fig. 3, the data have been expressed in terms of mean proportion
of nodes recalled.

ing Simple Reactions (22%), ^(1,88)= 15.01, p < . 0 0 1 . What is somewhat
surprising is the generally low level of recall of Goals. Goal propositions may be
omitted from recall because of their redundancy with the following Attempts,
which in most cases make the Goal-directed motivation clear. Both Simple Re-
actions and Goals were less well recalled from interleaved stories (22%) than
from standard stories (31%), F ( l , 88) = 6.95, p < .01, and children recalled fewer
of both than did adults, F(3,88) = 15.01, p < .001. Although the youngest chil-
dren had particularly low recall of Simple Reactions and Goals (11 and 18%,
respectively), even adults show poorer recall of these types of proposition (33
and 38%) than any others.

Quality of Recall

Mean number of reasonable additions and distortions per story for standard
and interleaved story conditions and the four age groups are shown in Table 2.
There were more additions in the interleaved story condition, F(l, 88) = 14.64,
p < .001, and an interaction of story type with type of addition (reasonable or
distorted), F(l, 88) = 20.73,p < .001. As can be seen in Table 2, approximately
the same number of reasonable additions occurred in the two types of story. Dis-
tortions in standard stories also occurred at about the same rate as reasonable
additions, but more than twice as many distortions were found in recall of inter-
leaved stories. Total number of additions increased with age, F(3, 88) = 10.84,
p < .001, but for all grade levels there were more distortions in the interleaved
than in the standard story condition. There was also an interaction of addition
type with grade level, F(3,88) = 2.83, p < .05. In the three groups of children
there were more distortions than reasonable additions, but for adults there were
approximately the same number of each type. In general, the adults were more
redundant and explanatory in their recall protocols. They also tended to add
commentaries and homilies about the stories (not included in the analyses)
which were virtually absent from the children's protocols.
TABLE 2
TABLE 3
The total number of each type of distortion (described in the Method section)
in standard and interleaved stories is shown in Table 3. The largest difference be-
tween the two story types was in repetitions of nodes. Subjects recalling inter-
leaved stories produced more than four times as many repetitions of nodes as
subjects in the standard story condition. Most of the repetitions appeared to be
an attempt to output a story according to both the interleaved and standard
structures. Eighty-one percent of the repetitions in interleaved stories either pre-
ceded or followed a structurally adjacent node from the same episode; in 61% of
these cases the repetition preceded the next node from the same episode. The
typical occasion for a nodal repetition was a transition from recall of several
interleaved nodes to at least two nodes from the same episode, e.g., a recall
sequence of Beginning 1, Beginning 2, Attempt 1, Attempt 2, Attempt 1,
Outcome 1, Ending 1.
There were more than twice as many character and event confusions in the
recall of interleaved stories as in standard stories. There were also more structural
additions and irrelevant or wrong material, but in these cases the difference be-
tween the two types of story was smaller. There were fewer opportunities to fill
a node with new material in the case of standard stories because of better overall
recall; however, adding new material and inventing material to fill an irretrievable
node were relatively more frequent than confusions and repetitions in standard
stories.

Temporal Sequencing of Recall

The major question of interest is the extent to which subjects in the inter-
leaved story condition followed the input order or the ideal structural order in
sequencing their output. In all of the temporal sequence analyses the loose cri-
terion for recall was used. In assessing the extent to which output was inter-
leaved, it seemed appropriate to include all recalled nodes, since even distorted
nodes and structural additions could be clearly assigned to one episode or the
other. The first comparison was made on the four age groups in the interleaved
story condition.4 Each subject's data were scored in terms of the percentage of
4Data from the standard story condition are not inlcuded in these analyses since, with
rare exceptions, recall followed the ideal (input) order.
TABLE 4
times episodes were recalled sequentially in a single unit, unbroken by any
propositions from the other episode. These percentages are shown in the first
column of Table 4. There was a much greater tendency for the children to se-
quence their recall according to the ideal structure than for the adults, F(3,44) =
7.91, p < .001. Although the tendency appears to decline by the sixth grade, the
three children's groups did not significantly differ from each other.
Although very few adults in the interleaved story condition recalled any
episodes completely in the ideal order, neither did they perfectly interleave their
output according to the input order. Only 2 out of 170 stories were perfectly
interleaved. Subjects usually produced a compromise between the two orders.
The Relative Ratio of Repetition (RRR) was computed for each subject's out-
put sequence data (Mandler, 1969). RRR, which ranges from 0 to 1.0, assesses
the extent to which items are clustered into categories during recall. In this case,
items were nodes and the categories were the two episodes. The RRR scores for
the four age groups in the interleaved story condition are shown in the second
column of Table 4.
All groups produced a substantial amount of clustering into episodes, but
adults had significantly lower scores than any of the groups of children, F(3,44) =
4.54, p < .01. The clustering data presented in Table 4 probably underestimate
the developmental trend somewhat, because of the positive relationship between
the RRR measure and number of items recalled. Of the various available cluster-
ing measures, RRR is less related to quantity of recall than most, but nevertheless
the positive relationship even if small is troublesome in developmental research
(Murphy, Puff & Campione, 1977). Typically, as in the present study, adults re-
call more than children, and can therefore be expected to show higher clustering
scores. The fact that in spite of their greater recall their clustering scores were
lower than those of children suggests that the weakening of the relationship be-
tween recall and ideal structure is even greater than the scores presented in Table
4 indicate.
To determine if certain pairs of adjacencies in output were more likely to oc-
cur than others two measures were computed. The first consisted of the proba-
bility that two structurally adjacent nodes from the same episode (e.g., Beginning
1 and Reaction 1, or Attempt 2 and Outcome 2) were recalled together in correct
sequential order, given that both were recalled. The second measure consisted of
TABLE 5
the probability that two nodes adjacent at input were recalled together in correct
input order, again given that both were recalled. For example, when subjects
have recalled Beginning 1 if they follow the structural order they will next recall
Reaction 1; if they follow the correct input order they will next recall Beginning
2. Similarly, once Beginning 2 has been recalled, the structural order dictates re-
call of Reaction 2, whereas the input order dictates recall of Reaction 1.
These two types of conditional probability, for each of the structural pairs
and the relevant adjacent input pairs, are shown in Table 5.5 It can be seen from
the table that structurally adjacent nodes were more likely to be recalled together
than input adjacent nodes. The most likely pair of nodes to be recalled sequentially

5 The probabilities of structurally adjacent and input adjacent pairs, such as Beginning-
Reaction and Beginning 1-Beginning 2, can sum to more than 1.0. A subject might recall
Beginning 1, Beginning 2, Reaction 2 in that order, omitting Reaction 1 altogether. If such a
pattern should occur in all stories, that subject would receive a conditional probability of
1.0 for both the structurally adjacent and input adjacent pairs. To the extent that pairs were
not recalled together, or were recalled in the wrong order, the sum of the two probabilities
will be less than 1.0.

was Attempts and Outcomes (.76). This proportion may be contrasted with
the likelihood that Attempts were followed by the next input node (Attempt 2
or Outcome 1); the proportion was only .12.
The relative degree of dependency on the various types of structurally ad-
jacent pairs versus their related input adjacent pairs was assessed by computing
difference scores for each subject. For each type of structurally adjacent pair the
related input pair probability was subtracted from the structurally adjacent pair
probability. Positive scores indicate that subjects were following the structural
order more than the input order. Because of the relatively low recall by second-
graders, there were a number of missing cells for some children in this group.
Therefore, the analysis considered only fourth- and sixth-graders and adults. The
results showed a general decline with age in the tendency to recall structurally
adjacent pairs together. The mean difference scores were .61, .43, and .31 for
the fourth grade, sixth grade, and adults respectively, F(2, 33) = 4.10, p < .05.
The difference scores also varied for the four pair types, F(6,99) = 5.96, p < .001.
The difference scores for Beginnings and Reactions (.21) were significantly lower
than the others. The scores for Attempts and Outcomes were the highest (.60);
Reactions and Attempts (.47) and Outcomes and Endings (.51) fell in between.
Comparison of the several analyses indicates that subjects were able to main-
tain the interleaved input order fairly well through the Beginnings of both epi-
sodes, but then tended to revert to the ideal structural order to sequence the rest
of their recall. Not infrequently they would also append a previously omitted
Ending at the end of their recall, resulting in a relatively high Endingl—Ending 2
adjacency score (see Table 5).
A final analysis of sequencing of recall concerned inversions of correct struc-
tural order within episodes for both types of story. This analysis compared the
occasions on which subjects recalled a later node from an episode before an
earlier node. It considered only the output order of nodes from a given episode,
whether the two episodes were interleaved in recall or not. As found previously
by Mandler and Johnson (1977) for well-formed stories, there were very few
such temporal inversions. Although more inversions occurred in the interleaved
story condition (.33 nodes per story) than in the standard story condition (.25
nodes per story), this difference was not significant nor were there any significant
differences among the various age groups. It appears that a story schema has a
strong temporal structure, which is sufficient to maintain the ordering of events
even when they are input in irregular fashion. It is possible to create disruption
in the ordering of events in recall (cf. Stein, 1976), but only under conditions of
more extreme distortion of input than used in this study.


DISCUSSION

The data presented here demonstrate powerful effects of a story schema on
recall. Even when stories were presented in an unusual interleaved fashion, re-
quiring subjects to keep track of two episodes simultaneously, the underlying
ideal structure of the story schema played an important role in retrieval. More
distortions and confusions were evident in recall of interleaved stories, but sub-
jects clearly knew what kinds of units had been presented and attempted to pro-
duce some relevant content for each. Thus, the schema directs retrieval toward
particular locations in memory. If the subject has successfully recalled an At-
tempt, for example, the schema next directs a search for a related Outcome. If it
cannot be retrieved, then the subject knows approximately what kind of material
to produce.
The working of the schema can also be seen in the kinds of distortions pro-
duced in recall of interleaved stories. It is not the case that retrieval merely
breaks down for irregularly presented material. Entire stories were no more
likely to be forgotten in the interleaved story condition than in the standard
story condition. Rather, the content of the interleaved episodes became con-
fused in systematic ways. Two kinds of distortion were common. In the first, the
two-episode structure of a story was kept relatively intact, but a single character
became the common protagonist for both episodes. Typically such reorganiza-
tion resulted in the two episodes being recalled sequentially. The other common
distortion was to create a single episode out of material taken from both. Al-
though no complete example of this type of reconstruction occurred in the Un-
lucky Day story, perhaps because the content of the nodes in its two episodes
was so different, a representative illustration would be a recall protocol consisting
of Jennifer's going to the store to buy a turtle, on the way falling down and
breaking her leg, and then having to stay in bed until she got well. Here two
episodes have been turned into one, but the single episode reflects the structural
requirements of a story schema.
Equally dramatic effects of an ideal schema were found in the sequencing of
recall. Subjects of all ages tended to cluster the interleaved stories into separate
episodes. Adults were better able to maintain the interleaved structure than were
children, but even the adults were not notably successful. The further recall
proceeded the more likely was the interleaving of output to break down and re-
call to revert to the ideal order. The large number of repetitions of previously
recalled nodes was another indication of the difficulty of maintaining the inter-
leaved structure. The more familiar schema appeared to override the attempt to
reproduce the less familiar serial input order. The schema dominated the recall
process to such an extent that when the unstable input organization was no
longer useful in directing recall, subjects backed up and tried again, using the
schema to produce a run of material from the same episode.
It is clear, however, that most subjects used both strategies to access the
stored material. The analysis of the conditional probabilities of output adjacencies
indicated that the story schema was the preferred retrieval method. It is not pos-
sible from a simple study of recall to determine whether a story schema is mere-
ly a preferred access route, or a generally more successful one than a novel serial
input structure. Other experimental paradigms must be used to address this
problem.
The developmental data indicated that the story schema was much more
prominent as a retrieval strategy for the children than for the adults. The data
suggest less flexibility on the part of children in the sense of their having fewer
routes into the storage system. In general, the children had relatively more dif-
ficulty in retrieving the interleaved stories. This difficulty might stem from con-
fusions occurring at the time of encoding material presented in unfamiliar format,
or it might arise from their overreliance on the story schema as a recall strategy;
one access route may not be as good as two. It would be instructive to require
both children and adults to order their recall in the two different ways, to com-
pare the efficiency of the two strategies.
Recall data alone also do not speak directly to the issue of the way in which
interleaved stories are represented in memory. The present data are compatible,
however, with the hypothesis that the stories are represented in their ideal
schematic form of two separate episodes, perhaps tagged with an interleaving
algorithm, at least by the adults. The analysis of the conditional probabilities of
output adjacencies indicated a closer connection between Attempts and Out-
comes than between other pairs of nodes, suggesting that these two nodes may
be especially tightly linked in the storage system. For all subjects the tendency
to produce these two nodes together was very strong, even when otherwise fol-
lowing the interleaved pattern fairly successfully. It was also noted that nodes
containing more than one proposition were rarely separated in recall by material
from another node, suggesting that nodes were encoded and stored as units. It
seems probable that the higher level nodes, such as Episode itself, are represented
in memory as units as well. However, to test this hypothesis we must move out
of the recall paradigm to probe question and reaction time experiments.
Finally, the children's clustering data in this experiment contrast rather sharply
with the many studies of children's recall of lists of words. Even when lists have
a categorical structure well known to children, unless given special training they
tend not to use that structure to access the stored material. However, their use
of a familiar structure to access connected discourse was dramatically evident in
the clustering data of the present study. Even when the material was input in
irregular fashion, the children reorganized it in terms of canonical story structure.
Thus, the basic organization of memory appears quite similar in children and
adults. When children deal with prose structure which is meaningful to them and
with which they have had extensive experience, they not only use that structure
but depend on it to organize recall even more than do adults.


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

I wish to thank the San Diego Unified School District and the staff and students of Doris
Miller Elementary School for their cooperation. I am especially grateful to Marsha DeForest
who helped write the stories and contributed to the scoring scheme, to Barbara Vance who


REFERENCES

Brown, A. L., & Murphy, M. D. Reconstruction of arbitrary versus logical sequences by pre-
school children. Journal of Experimental Child Psychology, 1975, 20, 307-326.
Colby, B. N. A partial grammar of Eskimo folktales. American Anthopologist, 1973, 75,
645-662.
Cole, M., Frankel, F., & Sharp, D. Development of free recall learning in children. Develop-
mental Psychology, 1971, 4, 109-123.
Kintsch, W. On comprehending stories. In P. Carpenter & M. Just (Eds.), Cognitive processes
in comprehension. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, 1977.
Mandler, G. Input variables and output strategies in free recall of categorized lists. American
Journal of Psychology, 1969, 82, 531-539.
Mandler, J. M., & Day, J. Memory for orientation of forms as a function of their meaning-
fulness and complexity. Journal of Experimental Child Psychology, 1975, 20, 430-443.
Mandler, J. M., & Johnson, N. S. Remembrance of things parsed: Story structure and recall.
Cognitive Psychology, 1977, 9, 111-151.
Mandler, J. M., & Robinson, C. A. Developmental changes in picture recognition. Journal of
Experimental Child Psychology, 1978, in press.
Murphy, M. D., Puff, C. R., & Campione, J. C. Clustering measures and organization theory.
Paper presented to the Society for Research in Child Development, New Orleans, March,
1977.
Propp, V. Morphology of the folktale. Augustin: University of Texas Press, 1968. (Original-
ly published, 1928.)
Restle, F. Answering questions from cognitive structures. In F. Restle, R. M. Shiffrin,
N. J. Castellan, H. R. Lindman, & D. B. Pisoni (Eds.), Cognitive theory, Vol. 1. Hillsdale,
N.J.: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, 1975.
Rumelhart, D. E. Notes on a schema for stories. In D. G. Bobrow & A. M. Collins (Eds.),
Representation and understanding. New York: Academic Press, 1975.
Rumelhart, D. E. Understanding and summarizing brief stories. In D. LaBerge & J. Samuels
(Eds.), Basic processes in reading: Perception and comprehension. Hillsdale, N.J.: Law-
rence Erlbaum Associates, 1977.
Spiro, R. J. Inferential reconstruction in memory for connected discourse. In R. C. Anderson,
R. J. Spiro, & W. E. Montague (Eds.), Schooling and the acquisition of knowledge.
Hillsdale, N.J.: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, 1977.
Stein, N. L. The effects of increasing temporal disorganization on children's memory for
stories. Paper presented to the Psychonomic Society, St. Louis, 1976.
Stein, N. L., & Glenn, C. G. An analysis of story comprehension in elementary school
children. In R. Freedle (Ed.), Multidisciplinary perspectives in discourse comprehen-
sion. Norwood, N.J.: Ablex, 1978, in press.
Thorndyke, P. W. Cognitive structures in comprehension and memory of narrative discourse.
Cognitive Psychology, 1977, 9, 77-110.
Worden, P. E. The development of the category-recall function under three retrieval con-
ditions. Child Development, 1974, 45, 1054-1059.